README.md, before:

# SpecBong tutorial

This is tutorial-like small project for ZX Next (TBBlue board) written in Z80N assembly (in [sjasmplus](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus) syntax/dialect) by Peter H. and John McG.

### What you'll learn

- how to kick off assembly-only project, producing NEX file
- how to set up Layer 2 and HW sprites
- how to write simple game-loop code handling controls
- partial how to set up your PC for development

### What you'll need

- basic knowledge about Z80/Z80N instructions and assembly programming
- basic idea about ZX Next HW capabilities

### What is the final goal

The final result after all parts should be very simple game allowing the player to control main character and jump over snowballs, similar to the NextBASIC version done by John a while back.

The background image is in Layer2 256x192x8 mode, static image from BMP file, HW sprites are used for the player character and snowballs (graphics provided by John).

### What is in this repository

All the code and data required to build the final NEX file, with commits history to check the evolution of the project from beginning. Particular commits are marked with "Part_#number" tag, which will be referenced from the tutorial text.

The tutorial text is (will be) in the ["wiki" part](https://github.com/ped7g/SpecBong/wiki) of this repository. It is written by John, reading the source code after each part was done, with his own experience how he understands the code, what he did to set up his environment and replicate the results and other insight, giving another angle on the project than the (heavily commented) source itself.

### Useful tools, links, etc

For the Next HW features description I use either [wiki](https://wiki.specnext.dev/Main_Page) (particularly [this](https://wiki.specnext.dev/Board_feature_control) page a lot), or the more compact form of technical info [nextreg.txt](https://github.com/MrKWatkins/ZXSpectrumNextTests/blob/develop/nextreg.txt) and [ports.txt](https://github.com/MrKWatkins/ZXSpectrumNextTests/blob/develop/ports.txt).

[Z80 instructions](http://clrhome.org/table/#) quick reference, [Z80N extended](https://wiki.specnext.dev/Extended_Z80_instruction_set) reference.

The code is written for [sjasmplus](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus) assembler, which is command line tool. On the project page in "release" tab you can download windows executable for current latest release, if you are using different OS, the sjasmplus is cross-platform project written in C++14 with minimal dependencies, and should be easily buildable on any modern OS on any platform which: is little-endian (x86, ARM, ..), has GNU Make, has C++14 compiler (gcc/clang/...). If you have difficulties to built it on your platform, yet it fits the description, open the issue on github (I'm using linux, KDE neon distribution on x86_64 CPU). You can then use it as any other common compiler, for example by writing build rules in the Makefile or configuring build-task in your IDE/editor.

Sjasmplus online [documentation](http://z00m128.github.io/sjasmplus/documentation.html) is of course essential resource to fully understand the assembler directives, how they are used and their arguments, and what should be the result.

I'm personally using [Kate](https://kate-editor.org/) text editor with the [syntax-highlight rules](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus/blob/master/asm-z80-sj.xml) from the sjasmplus project, and "Build plugin" set up to assemble asm file in editor (the build-rule I use mostly looks like "`sjasmplus --fullpath --nologo --lst="%n.lst" --lstlab --msg=war "%n.asm"`").

If you want to use VSC (VisualStudio Code/Codium), there are two alternatives for syntax-highlight and intelligent assistant: [Z80 MacroAsm](https://github.com/mborik/z80-macroasm-vscode) or [Asm Code Lens](https://github.com/maziac/asm-code-lens), and then some more plugins: [Z80 Assembly Meter](https://github.com/theNestruo/z80-asm-meter-vscode), [Z80 Debug Adapter](https://github.com/maziac/z80-debug), ...

Emulators: currently there are only two emulators with TBBlue-board emulation. [#CSpect](http://cspect.org/) and [ZEsarUX](https://github.com/chernandezba/zesarux). Neither is perfect, but together and with all their modes they cover almost all possible Next-developer's needs (I have my own temporary [fork](https://github.com/ped7g/zesarux) of ZEsarUX with some extra modifications to make the TBBlue emulation closer to the 3.0+ cores of ZX Next). This tutorial project should work in any of the emulator both in "quick-boot" or "full-system-image" way of launch (and of course on the real board too).

Commit message:

.README adding explicit link to github releases

README.md, after:

# SpecBong tutorial

This is tutorial-like small project for ZX Next (TBBlue board) written in Z80N assembly (in [sjasmplus](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus) syntax/dialect) by Peter H. and John McG.

### What you'll learn

- how to kick off assembly-only project, producing NEX file
- how to set up Layer 2 and HW sprites
- how to write simple game-loop code handling controls
- partial how to set up your PC for development

### What you'll need

- basic knowledge about Z80/Z80N instructions and assembly programming
- basic idea about ZX Next HW capabilities

### What is the final goal

The final result after all parts should be very simple game allowing the player to control main character and jump over snowballs, similar to the NextBASIC version done by John a while back.

The background image is in Layer2 256x192x8 mode, static image from BMP file, HW sprites are used for the player character and snowballs (graphics provided by John).

### What is in this repository

All the code and data required to build the final NEX file, with commits history to check the evolution of the project from beginning. Particular commits are marked with "Part_#number" tag, which will be referenced from the tutorial text and you can download the sources and NEX file for each stage at [releases](https://github.com/ped7g/SpecBong/releases).

The tutorial text is (will be) in the ["wiki" part](https://github.com/ped7g/SpecBong/wiki) of this repository. It is written by John, reading the source code after each part was done, with his own experience how he understands the code, what he did to set up his environment and replicate the results and other insight, giving another angle on the project than the (heavily commented) source itself.

### Useful tools, links, etc

For the Next HW features description I use either [wiki](https://wiki.specnext.dev/Main_Page) (particularly [this](https://wiki.specnext.dev/Board_feature_control) page a lot), or the more compact form of technical info [nextreg.txt](https://github.com/MrKWatkins/ZXSpectrumNextTests/blob/develop/nextreg.txt) and [ports.txt](https://github.com/MrKWatkins/ZXSpectrumNextTests/blob/develop/ports.txt).

[Z80 instructions](http://clrhome.org/table/#) quick reference, [Z80N extended](https://wiki.specnext.dev/Extended_Z80_instruction_set) reference.

The code is written for [sjasmplus](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus) assembler, which is command line tool. On the project page in "release" tab you can download windows executable for current latest release, if you are using different OS, the sjasmplus is cross-platform project written in C++14 with minimal dependencies, and should be easily buildable on any modern OS on any platform which: is little-endian (x86, ARM, ..), has GNU Make, has C++14 compiler (gcc/clang/...). If you have difficulties to built it on your platform, yet it fits the description, open the issue on github (I'm using linux, KDE neon distribution on x86_64 CPU). You can then use it as any other common compiler, for example by writing build rules in the Makefile or configuring build-task in your IDE/editor.

Sjasmplus online [documentation](http://z00m128.github.io/sjasmplus/documentation.html) is of course essential resource to fully understand the assembler directives, how they are used and their arguments, and what should be the result.

I'm personally using [Kate](https://kate-editor.org/) text editor with the [syntax-highlight rules](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus/blob/master/asm-z80-sj.xml) from the sjasmplus project, and "Build plugin" set up to assemble asm file in editor (the build-rule I use mostly looks like "`sjasmplus --fullpath --nologo --lst="%n.lst" --lstlab --msg=war "%n.asm"`").

If you want to use VSC (VisualStudio Code/Codium), there are two alternatives for syntax-highlight and intelligent assistant: [Z80 MacroAsm](https://github.com/mborik/z80-macroasm-vscode) or [Asm Code Lens](https://github.com/maziac/asm-code-lens), and then some more plugins: [Z80 Assembly Meter](https://github.com/theNestruo/z80-asm-meter-vscode), [Z80 Debug Adapter](https://github.com/maziac/z80-debug), ...

Emulators: currently there are only two emulators with TBBlue-board emulation. [#CSpect](http://cspect.org/) and [ZEsarUX](https://github.com/chernandezba/zesarux). Neither is perfect, but together and with all their modes they cover almost all possible Next-developer's needs (I have my own temporary [fork](https://github.com/ped7g/zesarux) of ZEsarUX with some extra modifications to make the TBBlue emulation closer to the 3.0+ cores of ZX Next). This tutorial project should work in any of the emulator both in "quick-boot" or "full-system-image" way of launch (and of course on the real board too).
